---
layout: post 
title: Github with multiple accounts 
---

h2. Using github with multiple accounts

Nowadays having a github account is quite convenient (if not mandatory for some). It's a great way to show what your skills are to potential employers or future clients. The only problem is that when you finally got hired by this dream company who found you on Github, you realize that they use Github too. In that case you might wonder if it's a good idea to use your personnal account.

I decided to open a new account for this purpose. And here is my personnal recipe (tutorial) on how to use both accounts on one computer. 

Disclaimer : I use MacOS X and Linux, and I don't have a clue how it could work for windows.

h3. SSH Keys

I'll assume here you already have keys and their public parts and they are both registered on your github accounts. Let's say, we have the following in our ~/.ssh folder :
<pre><code>config
id_rsa_alice
id_rsa_alice.pub
id_rsa_bob
id_rsa_bob.pub
</code></pre>

Now let's edit the _config_ file. We are adding some url specific configuration : 
<pre><code>Host alice.github.com
  Hostname github.com
  User git 
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa_alice
Host bob.github.com
  Hostname github.com
  User git
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_rsa_bob
</code></pre>

The lines above actually create an automatic redirection to the respective account on github when using either bob.github.com or alice.github.com. 

For example, when you want to clone a repository with the "Bob" account, instead of using:
<pre><code>git clone git@github.com:bob/bobsproject.git</code></pre>

You should use :
<pre><code>git clone git@bob.github.com:bob/bobsproject.git</code></pre>

The same way, when configuring an origin for an "Alice" project, it be should set up this way:
<pre><code>git remote add origin git@alice.github.com:alice/p1.git</code></pre>

But there is a trick (or a bug if you are a glass half empty person), and the person who will commit will be the one configure in the git configuration.

h3. Configure git

There are two ways for configuring git : either globally or project specific. And because we use two certificates, it has to be project specific. To configure Alice in a git project you have to type the following commands, go to the project folder and type : 
<pre><code>$ git config user.name "Alice In Wonderland"
$ git config user.email "alice@wonderland.com"
</code></pre>

For more information, check "the git book":http://book.git-scm.com/2_setup_and_initialization.html

h3. That's it

Well here you are, you have everything you need to know to use multiple github accounts. Please leave a comment, if you find any mistakes or you come up with a better solution.
