---
layout : post
title  : Using bind() in Javascript
---
This article is an attempt to give further explanations on *Function.prototype.bind*,
first explaining which problems it solves and then showing how it could help design
software.

### Bind

Bind is a function of the *Function* prototype which has the following signature :
Function.prototype.bind( newThis, [arg1, arg2, ...])

Let's put aside the optionnal parameters for now. When this method is applied on a 
function it creates a new function on which the *this* object context is definitely set. 

Here is a small sample you can execute in your browser:

```javascript
//in a web environment
function a() { console.log(this) }
a(); // prints out the window

var b = a.bind({ foo : "bar"});
b(); // prints out the object { foo : "bar"}
```

When the function a is called, it uses the default environment object 
which is *window*. *bind* call creates a new function and sets the *this* 
of the function to some random object here. b call prints out this object.

As I stated earlier it has also this interesting side effect of setting *this* for good. 

```javascript 
// We continue on the previous environment
a.call({baz : "bar"}); // prints out {baz : "bar"}
b.call({baz : "bar"}); // prints out {foo : "bar"}
```

*call* runs the function it is applied on with *this* set to the first parameter
given to it. Given that a and b are basically the same functions, one could have 
expected to receives the same output. And this is not the case here. *Bind* is behind 
the scene changing the value of *this* dynamically before the function is actually 
called.

There is a case I encountered in which I needed *bind*. But it wasn't obvious to me
at the time. I wanted to be able to use *console.log* directly as a callback. But I
couldn't because the browser was throwing some 'illegal invocation' exception.
 
```javascript 
console.log("toto"); //Prints french foo bar toto ;)

// Let's say we want to inspect some event objects in a programmatic way
// You could try this
document.body.addEventListener("click", console.log);
// but it won't work, throwing a dreadful 'illegal 
// invocation' Exception 

// Another approach  
document.body.addEventListener("click", function consoleLogProxy(){
  console.log(arguments);
});
// it doesn't report a correct line number

// The solution :
var log = console.log.bind(console)

document.body.addEventListener("click", log);
```

In the first attempt, an illegal invocation exception was throwned because 
*log* wasn't executed with the *console* context.

The second example is a classic way to do the job. But in this particular case,
it has a problem, the browser console won't report the correct line number. If
this function is a util function of your framework in this fashion, the line number
reported by the console will always be the one where the console.log is called. And
this is not very very useful.

### Beyond this

*bind* takes a variable number of arguments. Each of these other 
arguments are set the same way *this* is set for the future calls 
on the newly created function.

```javascript 
var logHello = console.log.bind( console, "Hello");
logHello( "Peter" ); // output > "Hello" "Peter"
```

Although the first argument may solve some headaches related to *this*, the other
arguments allow a whole bunch of software design tricks. One may use functions as a 
way to create high level behaviours and then use bind to fill in the gaps. 

This is the killer feature lying into bind.

### Designing with functions

The classical example for such design is addOne. Let's consider the function 
*add*, which takes two numbers and return the sum of it. *AddOne* is the 
function that takes one number and return the sum of this number and one. This
is how it looks : 

```javascript 
var add = function add(n, m){ return n+m; };
var addOne = add.bind(null, 1);

addOne(2) // 3
```

To be honest, this example always left me with the feeling it was useless. If you
feel me, here is another one I believe is better. It is about making stuff, be it
a tasty cake or a cool machine. Here is how it all start :  

```javascript 
var makeLemonPie = function(){
  var ingredients = getIngredients();
  var lemonPie = lemonPieRecipe(ingredients);
  return lemonPie;
};

var makeRobots = function(){
  var parts = getParts();
  var robot = robotPlans(parts);
  return robot;
}
```

The first part of designing is to look for similarities. We have two functions 
that create stuff. First they fetch some ingredients and then use a recipe function 
to combine them and then return the resulting stuff.

The common pattern can therefore be extracted into a more generic function : 

```javascript 
var make = function( formula, getIngredients ){
  var ingredients = getIngredients();
  var product = formula(ingredients);
  return product;
}
```

And then it can used to create robots and lemon pies. 

```javascript 
var aRobot = make(robotPlans, getParts);
var aLemonPie = make(lemonPieRecipe, getIngredients);
```

As long as we provide the recipe and some resource provider, everything 
works fine. But if we were to share this code with a third party, they
would have to know about everything, the formula/recipes and the ingredients 
provider. Instead, we can use *bind* to provide a proper API. 

```javascript 
// Maker module
var robotM = require("./robot.js");
var cakeM = require("./lie.js");

var make = function( formula, getIngredients ){
  var ingredients = getIngredients();
  var product = formula(ingredients);
  return product;
}

module.exports = {
  makeRobot    : make.bind(null, robotM.robotPlans, robotM.getParts),
  makeLemonPie : make.bind(null, cakeM.recipe, cakeM.getIngredients),
  abstractMake : make
};
```

The *make* function is a general one. It describes a process, something that
is, by nature, abstract. It is a very high level vision of the making/baking
process. It doesn't hold any assumptions on objects that will be built in the 
future. There are no constraints on which ingredients are required nor on the
output. 

People call this form of specialization of functions currying or partial
application. And as you can see, it is a poweful way to structure code in a 
functionnal style.

### Bound callbacks

I want to finish this post with a way to rewrite a very common pattern. When
passing a callback function which is already, we may want some parameters to be
already passed. The common practice is to define an anonymous function. But it
gets a bit abstract.

Let's consider the following function :  

```javascript 
function a(n){ console.log( Data.now(), n ); }
```

This function prints the execution time and the value passed in the first
argument. The date is not relevant for now.

Let's take *setTimeout* as the callbacked API for the next example on how would be the
common practice. It is not really a very _real life_ example but most of us 
are familiar with its use. Here it is : 

```javascript 
a(0);
setTimeout( function(){
  a(5);
}, 5000);
```

The first call to a prints the time followed by 0. The second call, after about 5 seconds,
prints the time (with 5 or more seconds more than the previous call), followed by 5.

We had to create a new function just to be able to preset one value, this is a bit verbose. 
And in this kind of states we might be tempted to try shortcuts. Such as :

```javascript 
a(0);
setTimeout( a(5), 5000);
```

The problem here is that the second invocation is evaluated right away, not after 5 seconds. 
This is shown by the inside call to *Date.now()* that is logged to the console, not 5 seconds 
but milliseconds after. It is very much like we did this : 

```javascript 
a(0);
a(5);
```

Hopefuly we have *bind* to help for doing correct and elegant code : 

```javascript 
a(0);
setTimeout( a.bind(null, 5), 5000);
```

The code in this case is strictly equivalent to the first solution. But beware, you have to
keep in mind that *bind* will create a new function which holds reference to parameters. This
might lead to memory leak.

### Conclusion

Bind is powerful, elegant, leads to a whole new world of program design and solve some problem
with callbacks. Use it, this is good!
