---
title: Types in JS?
---

The other day I stumbled upon [this article](https://medium.freecodecamp.com/stop-bringing-strong-typing-to-javascript-4da0666cba6e).
I initially reacted strongly as I'm of those thinking restrictions can give you more power
and creativity(in code). So I started writing about wrong it was, time passed and I realised
that really it wasn't that wrong. I realized that I really wanted to write about JS and a
world in which we could have the pleasures of Javascript and also have the safety and help of a
strong and smart type checker / type system (spoiler it exists).

But let's start from the beginning.

## What is a type?

Usually -> a tag added to code to help the compiler figure out what you're talking about

But typing a variable does not come from the language, but from the API used and the
kind of operations that you want to achieve. It has a contextual nature, and it is
based on how we think about our system, its modelisation.

Example?

## Types are made for reasoning

Types let you express what is behind a variable. With that tool in your hand, you can define
more specifically what can be done with a variable. And also more importantly, it expresses
what can't be done.

And types are here, wether or not you use them explicitely.

## Type checkers are made for checking

If you've ever had the chance to work with a statically typed language, you probably remember
having the compiler answering you that you're doing is wrong. And it might be a painful
experience.

The type checker won't be happy until it knows that every operation on every variable is
valid given the type system it implements.

!! It's all about proving the code

But those type checkers are getting fancier and fancier. Some language require very few
explicit anotations of your code. The code is one big piece of code. One piece calls
anohter, a method might call a function. At some point, this or that function is typed, which means
that we can analyse the code using the returned value and infer the type of the resulting process.

## What about Javascript, then?

So after all, should we add types in Javascript? And the answer is definitely no.

Is it a good idea to compile code to JS? Why not, if you're not confident in JS skills.

But what then? Flow! The approach of flow is quite interesting:

 - expresiveness: fancy typesystem
 - no hassle: type inference
 - not another language: strip down the tagging you'll end up with es6

The *compilation* is fast, as it is basically stripping down the sugar used by the type checker.

What it doesn't do: runtime checks. But heck we're doing JS :P


